[Music]
one common mistake that people make is
they just try to cut a little bit of
everything five percent here five
percent there
life sucks when you do that and the
classic thing we've all heard is three
dollar lattes blah blah blah
saving three dollar lattes is not gonna
change your life at all okay i've run
the map you save it for 60 000 years
maybe you end up with some real material
savings none of us are doing it you
would be better off picking your two to
three biggest expenses and going after
them
[Music]
everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is ramit sethi he's a new
york times best-selling author who
fortune magazine called the new finance
guru he's a leading voice in the world
of personal finance and has been
featured by a gaggle of the world's most
prestigious media outlets including
forbes magazine alongside warren buffett
i might add cnbc the wall street journal
cnn the new york times and a bunch of
others he's been going absolutely ham
recently with nearly daily updates
during this crisis and over one million
people read his posts and watch his
content every single month to help them
navigate this unprecedented time for
meat thank you for joining us man thanks
for having me back
dude i'm excited um as soon as this hit
and it became super apparent what was
going to be happening in terms of the
economic shakedown i was like we got to
get ramit back on the show you have such
an individualized take like so many
people are talking at a very high level
about the economy and all that but i
think it still leaves a lot of people
paralyzed in terms of what should i be
doing right now today um so how do you
think about this how does your normal
advice compare to what you're advising
people to do now in the midst of what's
going on
i have definitely made some changes in
my financial advice
one of the first things is that
i am now advising people to target a
one-year emergency fund which sounds
like a lot we can talk about how do you
calculate that and how do you actually
do that if you lost your job for example
but that's one change
you know another thing that i've really
been talking to people about is the
psychological mindset of how to take
action right now and you know there's a
little framework that i've been sharing
with people which is
step one is you have to accept reality
and that means that for example if
you're a waiter
your job's not coming back for a long
time and we have to just accept that
that is the case that's really painful
because culturally most of us are
optimistic we want to go west we think
that everything is going to work out all
of our movies end with two people
walking off in the sunset
but sometimes reality is a little
tougher than that
the second thing that we have to do is
make a plan
it's one thing to be worried and anxious
about money fine all of us are feeling
that way but after we accept reality uh
we have to decide hey what if things go
great how am i gonna come out of this
but also what if things go poorly and
then finally we have to move
uh in normal times we are so uh we get
paralyzed and if you think about if
you're driving down the freeway and you
see something in the middle of the road
what's the first thing you do you slam
on the brakes it makes sense but in a
time like this in a crisis that's
actually the last thing that you want to
do you don't want to what do you mean
when you when you say slam on the brakes
in this you're saying just don't um stop
thinking don't stop processing opening
bills moving forward making a plan
correct because you see what happens is
most of us freeze we don't know what's
going to happen we wait for the
government to tell us we wait for our
boss to tell us we wait for everyone
around us to tell us what's going to
happen and we delegate our own authority
now hopefully they know but i think
reality has shown that they don't and so
better that we move instead of staying
stagnant and paralyzed and waiting and
listen to this it's even better if you
move and you make a couple of mistakes
as long as you are moving but so many of
us are paralyzed to do anything and that
is the last thing you want to do right
now yeah i agree with that violently one
thing that i'm always telling people and
it's counterintuitive and i have to i
often get a lot of pushback on this
which is absurd to me but it's better to
move a thousand miles an hour in the
wrong direction than to stand still
because standing still you're not
learning anything you're not running any
tests obviously i'm not saying knowingly
run a thousand miles an hour in the
wrong direction i'm saying you picked a
direction it was your best bet in terms
of what was gonna work but no matter
what happens down that path you're gonna
learn something if you're paying
attention and so yeah i think that's
super powerful i want to go back to what
you're talking about with the emergency
fund
how the hell
do people who are
they're living a life where they're just
sort of making ends meet they're living
paycheck to paycheck i think the status
most people have if they're hit with a
surprise 500 bill they can't pay it so
if they're in that zone now especially
um and i'd love you to answer this two
ways how do they do it if they have
their job and then how do they do it if
they just lost their job
okay great let's start with people who
lost their job i want to talk to them
first because it is urgent for them and
other people who still have their job or
have savings you have a little bit more
leeway so
for both groups the typical advice that
you hear is to shrink and cut back on
everything
but as i've always said there's a limit
to how much you can cut there's no limit
to how much you can earn so there are
really three ways that i talk about in
terms of getting stable
and it's the ceo strategy cut costs we
all know the the flavor but i'll give
you a specific example i had somebody
uh reach out to me and say ramit my
wedding isn't for like seven or eight
months what do you think i should do
and i said without missing a beat i said
you got to cancel it and as someone who
has planned a large wedding i know how
painful that is to just think of all the
money lost all the planning all the time
but at a time like this
money in your pocket is worth more than
money in your pocket later so money in
your pocket now is worth more than money
in your pocket later that means if you
have to cancel certain things that are
going to incur
fees later fine deal with the fees later
but get the money in your pocket that's
c
e earn more we can talk about earning
more in a second but there's a whole
opportunity there to start businesses
and start earning more oh
is really
something that a lot of people haven't
thought about right now so whether you
have a job or not you can call up the
companies that you owe money to or you
transact with
and you can get some surprisingly great
results for example your student loan
company if you guys own oh student debt
uh if you owe credit card debt
uh if you have a cable bill a cell phone
bill or even a landlord you pick up the
phone and this is what you say you say
i've been a good customer for three
years covid19 is making it difficult for
me to be able to pay my bills like i
usually do i'd like to know what options
you have available for me
and my readers have used this script a
lot of them have gotten their payments
paused with no finance or interest
charges and some of them have even
gotten rent waived so there's a lot of
opportunity you're talking about
possible hundreds or even a thousand
plus dollars with one phone call that is
how you start
yeah i think that's really smart i
remember when i was doing believe it or
not i used to be a telemarketer and they
would talk a lot about what are the
magic words here's here they said
everybody wants the magic words that you
say and at one point i was also selling
door-to-door and so like you know knock
knock by this like what are the magic
words to get people to do it um i want
people to understand what you just said
is this is a script right those are the
magic words so don't say words like that
say those exact words i know that you
also did a video on this i'm sure you've
written this down as well um people
people need to understand that you're
giving them the keys of the kingdom but
the one thing that you can't do is pick
up the phone for them uh and in sales
again we used to joke for some people
that phone is really heavy and
it's like just you know picking it up
and making the calls is where people are
really going to struggle but man like
here here's what's interesting about do
or die times i don't wish them on
anybody but it is really fascinating
when you're backed into a corner the
reserves emotionally that you find this
is one of the things i find so
interesting about your background that
you studied psychology so
what is it that makes people so reticent
to pick up that phone and how do you
help them over that hurdle because some
people will hear the logic of hey a
thousand dollars with a single phone
call they're going to do it other people
still won't that phone's still heavy
do you
how do you approach people that are
hesitant
i remember
hearing a podcast interview with a
former navy seal
and he said when other people do
push-ups they get tired
the more push-ups i do the stronger i
get
and i just thought it was such a
beautiful reframe that when things get
hard we can actually get stronger so you
know so many of us wish for things to be
easier and the first question they ask
when they hear that script is can i text
them or email them and that's the wrong
question to be asking because what
you're really saying is that phone
scares me or calling up somebody and
asking for what i want scares me so is
there some shortcut i can take and i
would challenge everyone here
just like you said i wouldn't wish these
times on anybody but in these times they
give us the opportunity to really rise
up and become bigger than who we
previously were and so if the phone
scares your past self maybe your current
self looks around and says you know what
it's time for me to find a way to
overcome that fear so that is my hope
for everyone here the phone call is
actually the smallest part of how you
can transform yourself right now in
retrospect when you look back on this
five years from now you're gonna look
back and say i can't believe that phone
call or i can't believe starting a
business and and posting something on
instagram selling something for 50 bucks
scared me because look how far i've come
but you have to
pick up the phone or you have to post
that first sale right now to know that
you can actually be bigger than you
thought you could
yeah for sure so when i think about cost
cutting uh the c in the ceo formula
which i love by the way um that one to
me is
there's a real opportunity for
gamification if people are anything like
me like i dude always as a kid i was
like well i'm just going to get rich
like that was always my solution why
would i save for retirement i'm going to
get rich like it was so self-evident to
me that that was the goal and that i
should spend my time focused there for
anybody that knows my story long
convoluted story i didn't end up making
money until i stopped chasing it but
like it that was just sort of the the
self-evident thing when we started quest
though i i had to cut everything man it
was such a huge gamble my house was on
the line we were personally guaranteeing
all of our loans i had to cut my salary
back to a third of what it was at the
previous company and it was like okay
and what i had to do to make that
was to to get ultra competitive one i'm
gonna cut my expenses down to nothing
nobody's lived sort of as lean and mean
as i'm prepared to live
we got rid of a car i was having to bum
rides off my employees i had between my
wife and i we had one car with a leaky
exhaust that would start shaking at
about 55 miles an hour is absolutely
hilarious and so i'm building this like
what ends up being a billion dollar
company but i'm dude i'm doing it from
like we don't go out we like if we rent
a movie like we're tracking the 299 like
everything was so to the bone in terms
of you know making sure that we only had
one car so we only had insurance on one
car but i thought other people at the
same time that they couldn't do it they
couldn't make the same i remember this
one story dude was buying
truffle mushrooms he was in the same
boat as me driving a mercedes eating
truffle mushrooms i was like what the
is happening what what what are you
thinking and when i would like
get this competitive spirit this
aggression towards the savings so to put
it in coveted terms to like dude if i
were in a position where i had to save
and i had lost my job it would be me
versus covet 19. yeah i love that you
know it's so rare to hear someone going
on offense with their money most often
like 99
of the time people are playing life on
defense especially with their money i
guess i spent that much i don't nobody
taught me about money oh there's no way
to make money on and on and on and even
in the relatively simple area of cost
cutting you were like no that i'm
going after it i'm going to become an
animal as you put it and so
you don't have to have that aggression
in every part of your life i think at a
certain point it would become
counterproductive maybe but
just to pick that one zone and say i'm
going to dominate this and whatever
winning means to you so let me give a
couple of suggestions for people for how
you can start and then how you can take
it to the to the next level if you want
to
first off with cutting one common
mistake that people make is they just
try to cut a little bit of everything
five percent here five percent there
life sucks when you do that and the
classic thing we've all heard is three
dollar lattes blah blah blah
saving three dollar lattes is not going
to change your life at all okay i've run
the math you save it for 60 000 years
maybe you end up with some real material
savings none of us are doing it you
would be better off picking your two to
three biggest expenses
and going after them going really hard
okay you got a car payment let's look at
that um you know
student loans have i called up my
student loan company have i gone and
typed in student loan debt payoff and
calculated how i could shave four years
off the payments no nobody has they
spend their life complaining but they
never read a single good book about
personal finance for their entire life
so pick two areas two to three
target ten fifteen percent savings if
you can achieve those
you don't have to worry about cutting
back on three dollar lattes those two to
three big expenses can be amazing now if
you want to go all the way like to what
you did
you can get aggressive and you can start
cutting everything but i would recommend
because money is also a psychology game
is you want to get a couple of wins
under your belt first so even something
as simple as getting your credit card uh
fee waived that's 35 bucks it's not that
much in the grand scheme but you're
going to be like wait a second tie
myself on the back i actually did this
and now you can start to get more
aggressive yeah that getting winds um i
don't know if you've heard about those
rat studies but if you put two rats in a
tube
by nature they will try to push each
other out and what they found is
whatever rat ended up pushing the other
rat out in the next fight they were more
likely to win if they won that one they
were more likely to win the next one but
they found the same was true
even if they pushed the rat from behind
and forced it to win that it would still
be more likely to win the next time even
if you didn't push it so there is
something baked into our psychology
where man if you can get those early
wins and you can like you said pat
yourself on the back and really feel
like okay i've got some momentum you get
that dopamine hit you're starting to
feel good and you're ready to take
things on so
come back for me to somebody they just
lost their job what are some insights
right now the government um seems to be
trying to do a fair amount to help
people stay solvent
i went through a period where i was on
unemployment i i hit the pause button i
called out of panic i was in a position
i literally couldn't pay all my bills at
once i had to pick month by month like
okay well i'll pay this one to make sure
that my electricity doesn't get shut off
and then i'll pay this one to make sure
that i have you know i forget now
what are the government programs or
things that people have available
okay so i'm really glad that you you
have shared that you were on
unemployment i think anyone who has had
a long career has had something bad
happen to them i was laid off from my
own company right so there everyone who
has any experience whether you're an
employee or an entrepreneur has had
something bad happen to them
and i say that because i've had my own i
will teach you to be rich readers who
have come to me and some of them as
recently as four weeks ago
they were big ballers they had great
jobs they were doing very well and
suddenly they were laid off through no
fault of their own and now it is
humiliating for them
to have to go to the unemployment
website
and my first
response to them when they were dming me
was to say
these services are here for you you
should not feel embarrassed about taking
advantage of them they are here for you
so
if it's a matter of pride or it's a
matter of feeling bad put it aside right
rewrite that narrative in your head that
i'm a failure because you're not and go
take advantage of every resource you
have available unemployment is one you
should do that first thing if you've
been laid off um you should also take a
look at what you can control with your
expenses so let's talk about that one
year emergency fund what is that
a lot of people mistakenly think hey i
make 60k a year my emergency fund needs
to be 60k there's no way i can save 60k
that's crazy
well you don't need 60k in full for your
emergency fund so let's break it down
the way you do it is
you imagine what is the minimum amount
of money you need to live to cover your
rent
uh you know if you or your partner got
laid off you would probably be cutting
back quite a bit okay how much does that
cost
then you say all right i am going to
take everything that i can and put it in
an emergency fund in cash just a simple
high-yield savings account you don't
need anything fancy now a lot of people
already have some money in savings
they've just never thought of it as part
of an emergency fund other people have
been following my book they've been
automatically investing so for them i
tell them put your investments on pause
and redirect that money to your
emergency fund now it's probably going
to take people a while to save 12 months
but guess what that's okay even if you
get seven months of the way there that's
better than nothing and once you have
that money you have security you have
safety you have the ability to breathe
and think about a perspective for your
job or your business that you want to
start so that is what i would recommend
take advantage of all the resources
you've got redirect any money you can
towards that emergency fund and remember
it doesn't necessarily have to be your
full salary it's probably a fraction of
that
you talked about a high yield savings
account is that really a thing right now
like are people giving interest rates
well they're actually it's a good
question because they're not really
yielding high but they're called high
yield savings accounts truthfully uh
people waste so much time chasing
interest rates i'm going to give you an
example people write me i get these
emails every single day uh ramit um my
ally account dropped from 1.5 to 1.35
oh should i switch i'm like
why are you emailing me this have you
actually run the numbers on a 10 000
balance we're talking about dollars per
year it's nothing so the key thing
everybody needs to learn right now is
you don't make money on your savings
account that's not where money is made
it's just meant to be safe and stable
the real place you make money from
chapter seven in my book is investing so
that's a whole different thing we can
talk about that for people who have
money
but right now they're paying zero
percent they're paying 0.5 it doesn't
really matter it's just there so your
money is liquid and available to you
yeah let's talk about the market so how
are you thinking about that now um it
scares me that i i
literally in this day and age strike me
down if i am wrong but it
it is crazy if you have money in the
stock market a put it in there assuming
that you're going to leave it there for
decades
that at this point in time people still
pull their money out in a panic
so i like legitimately dude i don't even
check if i look at my numbers once every
six months like and even then i'm like
up or down it doesn't matter it's all
sort of phantom it's like that's a
20-year play like yeah don't uh anyway
i'm not the finance guy how are you
thinking about the market all right so i
want to tell you this story this i got
this dm about two weeks ago someone dm's
me on instagram i'm at ramit and she
goes
ramit i loved your book thank you i read
it i just finished it two weeks ago
anyway i sold all my investments and the
market went up like 12 so what do you
think i should do and i was like
oh
i was like did you miss pages zero
through three hundred so this is a i
it's a teachable moment because i want
everyone to understand how to think
about your investments and you're
exactly right
when you invest something you are not
investing for money that you need in the
next one two three four five years this
is money that is long term money and
every study and you can see them cited
in chapter six of my book
shows that long-term passive investing
that is
investment you're not checking every day
you're not trading all that
money you automatically contribute once
a month and it goes in there that's the
money that makes you serious cash like
real like multi-millions of dollars
most people
do not understand that and again
remember what i said earlier most people
have never read a single book about
personal finance so they have all kinds
of kooky theories about money that they
don't even know what they're saying do
it for the tax deduction and all this
crazy i'm like pick up a book
that's what you really need to do
and so when you learn this stuff you
learn that
uh your money is there for the long term
you learn that costs really matter you
probably shouldn't be checking your
investments
more than once every month
once every six months is even better
and you do not need to be selling it
especially now unless you are truly
truly out of money and for most i would
say like 99 of the people who write me
asking if they should sell are not even
close to an emergency situation they're
just afraid fear is the last thing you
want it will cost you dearly
yeah do you think this is crazy so if
somebody came to me and said hey i don't
have an emergency fund but i'm thinking
of investing in the stock market i'd be
like yo rule number one and i always
would have historically said six months
but six months of cash on hand i always
said that
i wasn't smart enough to see a freezing
of the economy like this but my thing
was like so many people hate their jobs
and part of the reason they don't quit
is because they don't have the money
like they can't afford to quit and
that's such a shitty way to live now add
on top of that we all realize just how
fragile the economy really is and
anybody's job so
do you think people should be investing
if they don't have the six or 12 months
in savings
no i don't now and i i've i've advised
people as i said a 12-month emergency
fund so that actually means that i would
recommend people pause their investments
and redirect it to a 12-month emergency
fund number one we you're right we've
seen how unstable
our jobs can be with something like this
and
number two
if you don't build a habit of saving
right now you're never going to do it
you didn't do it when the economy was
good you're not doing it when the
economy is bad
you're never going to do it so i want
everyone listening to force themselves
take advantage of the situation and
really change your behaviors get that
emergency fund in order yes it will cost
you because you won't be investing right
now and that sucks but if you don't have
12 months that is the price you pay for
not having saved it and it's okay
all of us are operating at different
levels we all have different advantages
in society
it doesn't mean that you're
being penalized or that you're morally
wrong but i do believe you should focus
on the emergency fund first invest
second
yeah so let's start with the person who
lost their job
so that person a lot of the the sort of
paths that i could go down in terms of
asking you take me to you know people
that have money and can um operate from
that position but i think it's far more
useful if we start with the person who's
really in trouble
so going back to the the ceo
um saying so we covered c and cut
expenses we covered oh you're going to
optimize the way that you're spending
you're going to get in there you're
going to get reductions and things talk
to me about earning what can people do
now they've lost their job it is
panic mode my first advice was if you
can
get a roommate move in back in with your
parents whatever like all the pride
that might be you up literally
let it all go um i lived within my mid
20s i lived with my mother-in-law so
it's like eh it just is what it is and i
had zero embarrassment over that let's
let's walk people through like what that
would look like what's your advice for
earning money in this difficult time for
somebody yeah
um i'm going to talk about earning more
i'm going to give some real examples i
just want to say i think it's really
amazing that you really owned that
intentional shrinking of your life and
and it's really valuable for us to be
able to hear the way you talk about it
and for me to be able to see you because
there's no shame in the way you're
talking you're like look i had to live
with my mother-in-law that's what i had
to do
and all of us you know i grew up with
immigrant parents
they came here they had to do a lot of
that when i look at it i'm like i
don't know if i could do that having
been born and raised in america but i
often think about what i have seen in
immigrant families and the idea that
we're going to do what it takes to
survive and to eventually thrive and if
we can't thrive at least our kids will
no shame just doing what it takes and
that is an attitude i think that has
been lost a bit but i hope is rekindled
now because it is very empowering to say
i'm not gonna feel humiliated about
having to do what i need to do for
myself or my family i'm gonna do it so
anyway i appreciate you sharing that
because it's it's rare that we get to
hear those kind of stories
um now as for the earning more what do
you do
it's funny you know
for the first thing that happened when
coronavirus hit
was people started emailing and dming me
and saying um i
i'll tell you about a real woman who dm
me and she said um ramit i've been
following you for three years she said
i'm a nurse
and i was playing around with the idea
of starting a business
but seeing everything that's going on
all this follow your passion
build logos it all seems so ridiculous
it seems so foolish
and i said to her i said you know thanks
for being in the healthcare field i
appreciate that
but if somebody needs a logo right now
that's not foolish at all
so we have to remember that even when
the economy has crashed
people are still willing to pay for the
things that they want and things that
they need and this has been true for
thousands of years people have paid to
adorn themselves with clothes they've
paid for food they've paid for
entertainment so right now what you see
is really two different groups of people
you see the
people whose first reaction is to say
why everything won't work oh nobody will
pay for anything there's no money around
and then you see the entrepreneurs who
say wait a minute
it's going to be harder
certain industries are are not going to
make any money right now fine let me
accept reality but
wow there's a lot of kids around sitting
at home and their parents will pay
anything so that they are learning
something and leaving them alone so they
can work
wow what are you doing on friday night
nothing like every other friday night i
will pay for something that my husband
and i or my wife and i or my girlfriend
boyfriend and i can do just for 20 bucks
just to let us enjoy life for that two
hours on a friday night
so there are massive opportunities i
will tell you that we have seen our
business continue to grow during this
time and i have lots of examples of my
own readers and students who have grown
their businesses during this time too
yeah that that is a really good point
and my my obsession is getting people to
understand something that you have said
multiple times here and i've seen your
content a million times
and in my own words it's you're gonna
see what you look for so if you're
looking for the problems you're going to
see the problems and it's like dude it's
so simple and it's so easy and i want to
like literally throw my computer across
room because people just they don't i
don't know if it is because it's so
simple that they don't realize how much
you yourself up by what you look
for and there's a great quote i forget
who it's by but it doesn't matter what
you look at it matters what you see
and if you look at this legitimately
like in
2009 when we started founding quest
this was at the like height of the great
recession and
we just it did it wasn't even like a
part of the conversation about whether
we could launch a company at that time
it was a question of is there a need
that we can fill with this product can
we add value to people's lives are we
passionate are we interested and then of
course it ends up being huge but it was
like if people could have been there for
the conversations and seen what we were
looking for which is oh what what could
we do that would really add value to
people what do we care about what are we
interested in like yo like let's do this
like this will be fun this will be
exciting and if you ask yourself a
fundamentally different question and the
question i highly encourage everyone to
ask is what would i love failing at
and if you do that
dude like then it all becomes fun i
can't guarantee that you're gonna win
right so i always tell people the
success is not guaranteed the struggle
is
okay well the struggle is the thing
that's guaranteed like what would you
love going to bat for every day but the
problem is like you said people are just
listing off all the reasons why
it's not going to work why they're
backed into a corner all of that and i i
cannot say enough people are going to
win in this time remedies are going to
win they're going to be they're going to
be people that come out of this with
huge companies
somebody laid out the number of tech
companies that we think of today as
being the behemoth uber um they listed
like six or seven zoom that all came out
during the great recession and now they
are dominant for you yeah but
when they came out it was like what are
you doing this is the worst time to
start a business
yeah i started i my book came out march
2009 and that was the absolute worst
point of the great recession and i love
what you said about the conversations
you were having let me tell you the
conversations i had so i had a book on
money and investing i will teach you be
rich the first edition came out i went
on tour to all these cities all these
local news producers would come into the
green room before i went on air
and they said what are you planning to
talk about and i would say well i'm
going to talk about how to negotiate
your salary how to invest for the long
term and on and on and they looked at me
like i was a martian they're like are
you aware there's 10
unemployment and i said yeah i get that
i know what's going on
if you want me to give you a couple of
savings tips i'll give you those but are
you also aware that there are literally
tens of millions of people in this
country who want to invest in themselves
who understand that although this is a
huge issue this is temporary and that we
will go back to growth and they just
looked at me like i was crazy luckily i
don't have a boss i'm my own boss so i
went out on air i said what i wanted to
say and this is where as an entrepreneur
you have to have some conviction
you also have to
borderline ignore
lots of people who will tell you you're
crazy because it's easy for people to
give you drive-by advice look they're
just driving by oh the economy sucks
oh that'll never work and they're
basically saying screw you you should
give up and and you know what it's easy
to identify the drive by advisors
much harder to identify your own mind
playing tricks on you when you start to
say things like this will never work
because or who would ever buy this right
now
you are doing the same thing those
drive-by advisors are doing you're just
driving by your own head you're saying
that'll never work
so
my advice to you on that is don't try to
deny it your mind will always play from
a position of safety not excellence and
so acknowledge it write it down and say
okay this will never work this is
horrible i suck i'm not good write it
down but then open up another piece of
paper and say okay i wrote down all the
reasons that this might fail now let me
write down all the reasons that this
might succeed and then take those two
pieces of paper and look and you choose
which one you want to follow
dude you just said something that
freaked me out cut all the way to my
soul which is that your mind will
operate from a place of safety not
excellence
that is so even just saying it again it
gives me the chills uh to see those as
as sides of a coin or opposites maybe is
a more interesting way to think of it
and that brings me to
something that i think is so so so
important you give some of the world's
best advice no on how to go in
and negotiate a raise
talk to me in terms of how can people
get a job so if you just lost your job
like how do you be
the kind of person that's going to get
hired because my thing is look you talk
about accept reality here's reality boys
and girls we've got what approaching 30
million people out of work this just
became an employer's market you've just
had what 10 15 years of being an
employee's market that is over now
you're going to be going into a fiercely
competitive environment and the question
is how do you stand out yeah i love
talking about this i really enjoyed last
time we were at your place and talking
about the salary negotiation that was a
blast so i want to share
what i have found in the last one month
so i have access to a lot of hiring
managers both my friends and in my i
will teach you to be rich community and
i reached out to them and i said hiring
managers tell me what are you seeing and
i also reached out to job applicants i
said what are you seeing so here's what
i heard
first off the job applicants
one of them told me i had four
interviews going three of them dropped
off the face of the earth they just
stopped responding okay that was a very
common trend um i've heard from job
applicants that the the markets they
were going after just completely dried
up so very common
interestingly on the hiring manager side
there were some people who said there
are hiring freezes that were immediately
instituted but i had some hiring
managers who said we are hiring and we
can't get enough applicants and i said
why do you think that is they're like i
think nobody thinks anyone's hiring so
there's a whole game being played around
us
and
of course it's true that right now it's
an employer's job market of course it's
true that it's fiercely competitive but
that doesn't mean we shouldn't still
focus on landing a job now i want to
tell you how i think about landing a job
right now
most people when they see an ambiguous
situation they get scared and they
freeze they wait for someone to tell
them what to do that's because that's
what we've been taught since we were
kids oh i don't know what to do is the
teacher going to tell me to go over here
or go over there and we've been
indoctrinated okay
but in times of ambiguity i think we
love it you and i we love we're like
ambiguous great i'll create my own
opportunity so imagine that you see a
job
uh that's in washington dc and you live
in seattle and it says requires eight
years of experience and uh dc based blah
blah blah i would look at that and say
great i only have three years of
experience and i live in seattle i'm
going to write the most amazing cover
letter and tell them why i deserve this
job i'm going to point to the exact
briefcase technique things that i've
implemented you guys can google
briefcase technique and learn about that
and i'm gonna tell them look i work in
seattle we can discuss dc but nobody's
working
physically right now so we might as well
just get this started so you don't have
to wait for the right candidate i am the
right candidate in other words take all
the rules and put them aside it's a
different time for most people they get
scared by that ambiguity for you you're
listening to this you're watching this
you can create your own rules right now
in the old days when people used to
carry around a briefcase you go in for
an interview and they say all right tell
me you know tell me about yourself blah
blah blah those are all rote questions
and yes you should answer them but what
really distinguishes a top performer in
an interview is that they say oh let me
tell you you know i spoke to several
people on your team i did a little
research i studied the interviews you've
given to the press recently and i put
together a little 90-day plan for what i
would do in my role let me show you boom
you theatrically pull out your briefcase
you give them a copy of your document
and then you say let me walk you through
this now as you do this the manager's
jaw drops you know she can't believe
that somebody came in and did this level
of preparation now let's just zoom out
for a second there's two types of people
listening to this right now the first
type is saying oh ramit how are you
going to find out any of the information
you're so presumptuous oh who would ever
think that you could go in and tell a
company what to do those people will
fail because you're looking for reasons
for this exercise not to work so why
don't you just give up right now and
save the middleman you're always going
to look for why something won't work the
other people
aka the thousands of people online who
have publicly talked about using the
briefcase technique
they go in and they do their homework
they use what we call natural networking
from our career program they meet other
people at the company they study what
the company's strategies are they also
accept that they probably can't get it
all right from the outside they're doing
the best they can 85 percent is better
than nothing and they walk in with a
proposal and although their proposal
isn't going to be perfect because
they're on the outside they did more
than anyone else and they just decimate
the competition and we see
what you a hiring manager do when you
see that your jaw drops and you can't
help but hire that person dude that is
that is the gospel truth one of the
things that i always worry about with
people in a time of crisis and this
speaks to you saying people freeze is if
you're in fight or flight mode quite
literally the blood is leaving your
prefrontal cortex your
cortisol levels the stress hormones
skyrockets you actually don't think well
and so being able to find a way to
center yourself to calm down to
get focused so that you can execute on
creating a plan you know just to keep it
to the 90-day plan to create a plan
that's actually useful you're not coming
from a place of desperation you're not
coming from a place of panic like you're
really getting yourself
to leverage the skills that you have and
then if you don't have skills
now is the time man like you've got to
be building that skill set man i'm so
glad you're talking about this so i want
to share how i
implement uh some strategies for that so
for people watching and listening you
know our business we have about 20 or 25
different programs everything from
earnable start a business find your
dream job learn how to find the job and
actually interview and use the all that
stuff
um but i don't allow people with credit
card debt to join the flagship programs
the really high-end ones and that
decision costs us millions of dollars
every single year
now why do i do that there's a couple of
reasons number one i believe that if
people had all the information and
motivation in the world about
credit card interest rates for example
that they would pay off their credit
card debt first before joining our
fairly expensive 2 000
or more programs that's logical if you
understood the math so and the second
thing is just the right thing to do i
don't want to take somebody's money when
they can pay off their debt use chapter
1 of my book and come back we'll be here
we've been here 16 years we'll be here
16 more
but the third thing is
people can't focus on long-term work if
they're worried about how they're going
to pay their rent
and that's why for everybody listening
if you're thinking about starting a
business or finding a job etc first
thing you got to do is take care of
yourself and your loved ones and that
means make sure you have a plan for your
rent make sure that you know you know
what is your son or daughter going to be
doing tomorrow when they're at home are
they going to be learning something
maybe watching tv whatever the case is
you got to cover the basics first if you
don't cover the basics
and then you go try and look for a job
of course you're not going to be
competitive with someone else who's
methodical calm cool and collected so i
want everyone to really
understand and internalize what you said
it all comes in steps and if you're
going out trying to compete with other
top performers you need to be in
fighting condition as well
yeah man that's really an interesting
approach and first of all 16 years i
knew you'd been in business for more
than 10 congratulations that's um that's
huge that is not easy to pull off um
especially given that this all you know
what you would have been going through
16 years ago in terms of the ups and
downs of the economy um super impressive
so
dude i think you have some of the best
actionable advice for
like people at a personal level where
can people connect with you where can
they get that
daily or weekly dose of of advice as
they navigate through this
so you can find me at
iwillteachyoutuberich.com the newsletter
is the primary place we send a lot of
our best stuff there if you want to know
i'm on instagram
ramit i'm on youtube at ramit sethi and
i'm on twitter at ramit overall i just
want people to remember that there are
some different ways of thinking about
money business and careers than you have
been taught from the general mass media
and if they're listening and watching
right here they know they're getting a
different perspective so i want people
to know you don't have to only cut back
you can earn more that even in times
like this of crisis you don't have to
play defense you can actually go on
offense and that there is a light at the
end of the tunnel whether you are a
beginning entrepreneur or you work a
nine to five there is
an approach you can take that's going to
set you up for success so that's what i
hope people find in my material no
question man so last question i have for
you if people were going to make one
change that would have the biggest
impact on them weathering this storm
what change would you have them make
take your calendar
blank it out right now just wipe
everything off and start planning your
week for how you want your day to go and
do it just for five days
honor the calendar you set
pick your time and make it valuable for
the things you care about if it's your
relationships put the time on the
calendar if it's finding a job do that
if it's optimizing your personal
finances do that but start by taking
control of your time
your process and the results will follow
i love that ramit dude thank you so much
for coming on man i really hope people
will follow up and stay engaged with
what you're doing i've watched a ton of
your content um the stuff that you were
doing nightly the fireside chats and
stuff
it's powerful dude and if people
actually take the advice i'm telling you
guys this is a weatherable storm
but you actually have to put into action
the things that he's talking about if
you just listen and you don't actually
do it this really will be just an
excruciatingly brutal time but i promise
there is a port in every storm and i
think his advice is exactly that
speaking of important storm if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
first way that most people think is like
if i'm going to negotiate for a raise
which like oh they might just like fire
me that's problem number one that's
that's the wrong way to look at it
if you go in and ask for a raise you're
not devaluing yourself you're actually
increasing your value